what does f Sidhu the European Food
Safety Authority assesses and
communicates on risks across the entire
food chain from field to plate covering
food and feed safety animal health and
welfare nutrition plant health and
pesticides the European Commission and
Parliament and national bodies in the EU
turn to F Sir for scientific advice on
food safety F sir can also initiate its
own work to look into a particular area
of concern F sir carries out its work in
close cooperation with EU Member States
F sirs advice is then used by the EU
institutions to shape the food safety
laws and policies that protect consumers
who deserve some work with to better
assess risks associated with the food
chain F sir has over 400 staff
collaborating with over 1300 highly
qualified experts in scientific risk
assessment scientists who sit on F says
Scientific Committee and panels are
appointed through an open and rigorous
selection process to ensure independence
all experts who work for F sir must
declare any interests to avoid any
potential conflicts of interest arising
to understand better how F sirs risk
assessments work let's look at how the
authority assess the health risks from
the illegal use of the chemical melamine
in milk powder used to make biscuits and
chocolate which could have been imported
into the EU
so how are risks assessed first the
hazard must be identified in other words
what is the cause and what is the effect
in this case the cause was melamine
which was found in milk powder where it
was used to cut costs and to simulate a
higher milk protein level it cannot be
used in the EU in food and feed because
it is toxic for the kidneys second
scientists must characterize the hazard
if consumers were exposed to men Amim in
foods what level could still be
considered safe what is the tolerable
daily intake form enemy third scientists
assess exposure so who is exposed and at
what levels after experts looked at what
types of food could potentially contain
melamine then using data from member
states they assess how much of this food
in this case chocolates and biscuits
children or adults eat finally
scientists can assess the risk in other
words what are the health risks
associated with exposure at the time F's
have found that there would be limited
risk from contaminated chocolate and
biscuits two adults and four children
there was only a risk at very high
levels of exposure F's as scientific
advice was then used by EU legislators
and Member States to make decisions to
protect consumers but f so does more
than just assess the risks it also
communicates its scientific advice so
that all interested parties receive
accurate and timely information on the
outcome of its scientific work
how does F so communicate and why f
there ensures that it's messages reach
the right people at the right time in
the right way through a wide range of
communications tools all of its advice
is publicly available on its website f
there informs public authorities at EU
and national level about its scientific
work risk managers can then reach out to
their own audiences F so works openly
and transparently and engages in
dialogue with partners and stakeholders
to provide comprehensive scientific
advice to EU legislators providing the
best science at the right time is how FS
are actively contributes to improve food
safety in Europe and to reinforce public
confidence and trust in the European
food safety system all this underlines
how F Z remains committed to ensuring
that Europe's food is safe